---
layout: mine
title: Tips for tig
last_modified_at: 2018-01-20T17:10:33+01:00
tags: tig git
accept_comments: true
---

# Tips for `tig`

`tig` is a tool mostly known for browsing `git` commits history, but it can actually do [more than just viewing](http://jonas.nitro.dk/tig/manual.html).

# Keyboard shortcuts

It's possible to assign keyboard shortcuts in its configuration file `~/.tigrc`.
The manpage [`tigrc(5)`](http://jonas.nitro.dk/tig/tigrc.5.html) describes its options.

For example, in the commit list view, to assign key "`r`" to perform `git rebase -i` onto the pointed commit under the cursor:

```
bind main r !git rebase -i %(commit)
```

This config line is split this way:
* `bind`: the `tig` command to set a keyboard shortcut
* `main`: the type of `tig` view where this shortcut is active, `main` is the commit list view
* `p`: the key to bind
* `!`: when the key is pressed, the following shell command shall be run (in the foreground, and make a pause after command is run)
* `git rebase -i %(commit)`: the command to run, `%(commit)` is replaced by the commit id which is pointed at in the commit list view

This can be handy if you rebase often to amend series of patches. For example along with:

```
bind main u !git commit --fixup=%(commit)
bind main P !git push origin %(commit):master --force
```

## Other uses

A project maintainer can view a series of patches with:

```
tig origin/master..contributor/branch
```

And cherry-pick some of the commits with the default configured "`C`" key.

# Archeology with `tig blame`

`tig` can be used to annotate lines of a file with commit info about when each line was modified for the last time.
This is similar to [`git-blame(1)`](https://www.git-scm.com/docs/git-blame) but it uses `tig`, so it's interactive.
To run it:

```
tig blame path/to/file
```

By pressing `enter` on a blamed line, `tig` displays the related commit message and its diff (only the diff of the displayed file is shown though, not of all files modified by the commit).

Sometimes though, the last commit that modified the line you're interested only made a cosmetic change, renamed a variable, or something else that hides the real commit that modified the line significantly (or introduced it!).
In this case, we should re-run `tig blame` on the parent commit indicated in the blame, for example, if `a1b2c3d4` is the id of the commit doing a cosmetic change:

```
tig blame -- a1b2c3d4~ path/to/file
```

will perform a blame on `path/to/file` in the state it was just before `a1b2c3d4`. ["`~`" refers to the parent commit](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rev-parse#_specifying_revisions).

This can be done with a keybinding:

```
bind blame B <tig blame -- %(commit)~ %(file)
```

Pressing "`B`" while viewing a blame will re-run `tig` on the commit before the one touching the line pointed at.

## Renamed files

However, this doesn't work if the file has been renamed between the last commit for the line and the commit being viewed...
A more complex command is required, we need to retrieve the previous filename (with `git-blame`) and pursue the blame from there:

```
bind blame B <sh -c "tig blame -- %(commit)~ $(git blame -L %(lineno),%(lineno) -p -- %(file) %(commit) | sed -n '/^filename /{s/filename //;p}')"
```

The [`git-blamed-diff`](https://github.com/hydrargyrum/attic/tree/master/git) can also prove useful in some situations.
Since `git-blame`/`tig blame` doesn't display removed lines, it can be hard to find when a removed line was introduced.

# Staging content

`tig` can also be used to stage content to the index or unstaging from the index. It's easier to use than `git add -p`/`git reset -p`, especially regarding the single-line operations.

The default key bindings are:

* `s` in main view to enter `status` view, similar to `git status`, showing which files are modified and have staged or unstaged hunks
* `u` in status view to toggle staging status of the pointed file
* `R` in status (or any other) view to refresh the view
* `c` in status view to enter `stage` view, where the diff of a file is shown
* `1` in stage view to stage/unstage a single diff line
* `u` in stage view to stage/unstage a diff hunk

As a general rule, the "`h`" key in `tig` will show all the configured key bindings.

# Grepping

`tig grep` is also an interface for navigating `git grep` results. For git repositories, it's a much faster alternative to `rgrep`, `ack`, `ag` or any other `rgrep` clone.
It only searches in tracked files though.

# See also

* [The Tig manual](http://jonas.nitro.dk/tig/manual.html)
