---
layout: mine
title: Python datetimes and timezones
last_modified_at: 2020-11-23T08:47:58+01:00
tags: python timezone
accept_comments: true
---

# Python datetimes and timezones

By default, Python datetime "now" functions do not return any timezones, and are called "naive" `datetime` object.

The result is that, by default, `datetime` objects are positively unreliable.
`1970-01-01 10:00 UTC` is a very different moment than `1970-01-01 10:00 PST`, and losing the associated timezone info like Python does makes a datetime variable by about 26 hours (yes, the [UTC+14 timezone exists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTC%2B14:00)).

So

	datetime.datetime.now()

returns the datetime in the local timezone but it does not set the `tzinfo` attribute.

And

	datetime.datetime.utcnow()

returns the datetime in UTC timezone but it does not set the `tzinfo` attribute either.
It obviously knows the timezone (it's in the name: UTC) but it is lost in the returned object.

# History

Back in Python 2, in the standard library, a [`tzinfo` interface](https://docs.python.org/2/library/datetime.html#tzinfo-objects) was provided to be used in datetime objects.
But there was no concrete implementation of that interface in the standard library, meaning there was no way to properly use timezones using only the standard library.
Not only did functions like `datetime.utcnow()` knew the timezone, they did not fill it, and there was no builtin way to fill it!

This could have been one of Python 2's terrible mistakes (along with the `str`/`unicode` mix) that Python 3 would have finally fixed, naturally fitting its Python 2 compatibility-breaking recklessness.

But it wasn't.

In Python 3.2, a [`datetime.timezone` class](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.timezone) was introduced, though it's very basic, not supporting timezone names but only numeric offsets. But the worst is: the ground is prepared but datetimes are still naive instead of timezone-aware, e.g.
`datetime.utcnow()` still loses the timezone info.

# `dateutil`

Looking away from this disaster, the [`dateutil.tz`](https://dateutil.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tz.html) package makes it easy though.
Not only did it implement the `datetime.tzinfo` interface long before Python itself did, it supports refering to timezone by names:

	tzinfo = dateutil.tz.gettz('Europe/Paris')

Unlike `datetime.timezone`, it also supports daylight-saving time (DST):

	>>> tzinfo.utcoffset(datetime.datetime(2020, 1, 1))
	datetime.timedelta(seconds=3600)
	>>> tzinfo.utcoffset(datetime.datetime(2020, 7, 1))
	datetime.timedelta(seconds=7200)

So `dateutil.tz` is a good complement to the ill datetime module.

# What to do then

When needing an UTC datetime, replace existing code:

	datetime.datetime.utcnow()

with:

	datetime.datetime.now(dateutil.tz.UTC)

And when needing local datetime, replace existing code:

	datetime.datetime.now()

with:

	datetime.datetime.now(dateutil.tz.gettz())

# Other libraries

[`pendulum`](https://pendulum.eustace.io/) gets it right:

	>>> import pendulum
	>>> pendulum.now()
	DateTime(2020, 11, 22, 23, 13, 28, 519023, tzinfo=Timezone('Europe/Paris'))

So does [`arrow`](https://arrow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/):

	>>> import arrow
	>>> arrow.now()
	<Arrow [2020-11-22T23:08:52.158173+01:00]>
